---
layout: post
title: "Rcpp"
date: 2015-11-22
---

## Introduction  
Rcpp is a R package that allows to easily incorporate C++ code in R. Nowadays this package is getting very popular in the R community. If you take a look at the R packsges developed by Hadley Wickham, most of them actually use Rcpp. Code written in C++ generally is much faster than R. This is why many R packages implemented their core functions in C++ with Rcpp. 


## Install Rcpp
Rcpp is just a regular R package and thus it can be installed as `install.packages('Rcpp')`.


## cppFunction
This function allows you to create a R function with C++ code. For example,   

~~~~
cppFunction("int times2(int x) { return 2*x; }")
times2(21) 
~~~~

Here x can only be an integer.

We can use IntegerVector or NumericVector to define a vector,  

~~~
library(Rcpp)
cppFunction("NumericVector la(NumericVector x) {
return log(abs(x));
}")
la(seq(-5, 5, by=2))
~~~

Note that the la function takes a vector as the input. So the calculation can be vectorized in C++, too.


## evalCpp
This function evaluates a single C++ expression   

~~~
evalCpp("2 + 2") 
~~~

## sourceCpp
This function allows to source a C++ file and the then function written in C++ can be called in R. The syntax is:  

~~~
#include <Rcpp.h>
using namespace Rcpp;

// [[Rcpp::export]]
Some C++ code


/*** R
some R code
*/
~~~

The Rcpp::export line exports the function written in C++ into R. Note that there is a space in the last line. 

Use the sourceCpp to source the C++ file in the above foramt. Then the function defined in the C++ file can be accessed in R.  



## Difference between C++ and R code
1. In R, we use assignment to create functions. But in C++, we don't need to assign the new function, it is similar to calling a function in R.  
2. We must declare the type of the output and input of the functions in C++.  
3. We must use return statement in a function in C++.  
4. We need to use ; for each line in C++.  
5. The loop in C++ is faster than that in R.  So it is fine to use loop in C++.  
6. In C++, the vector indices start at 0, not 1.  
7. In C++, the method is called with full stop (.).  
8. In C++, to subset a matrix, we need to use (), not[].  

## Rcpp classes  
1. scalar: int, double, bool, String  
2. vector: IntegerVector, NumericVector, LogicalVector, CharacterVector  
3. matrix: IntergerMatrix, NumericMatrix, LogicalMatrix, CharacterMatrix  

### Extract a column from R dataframe
One can use as to extract a column from the dataframe in R and convert into C++ variable.  

~~~
NumericVector col = as<NumericVector>(df["col1"])
~~~

## Rcpp suger
Rcpp has suger version functions that mimic the R functions. For details, check the [Rcpp sugar manual](http://dirk.eddelbuettel.com/code/rcpp/Rcpp-sugar.pdf)  

1. All the basic arithmetic and logical operatiors are vectorised.  

~~~
NumericVector x;
NumericVector y;
NumericVector z = x/y;
~~~

x and y are two vectors. We can get z=x/y as a vector.

2. Many R functions have been implemented in Rcpp and they can be directly used such as max, min, ifelse etc.


## Include C++ files in the R package  
1. In the R package folder, create the `src` folder and put all C++ files in this folder.  
2. In the DESCRIPTION file, add `LinkingTo: Rcpp` and `Imports: Rcpp`. If Imports already exists, add Rcpp to it.  
3. If Git is used, modify `.gitignore` file to ignore the C++ compiled files.  
4. In the `R code`, add the roxygen tags (assume the roxygen is used) at the top of your R code:

~~~
#' @useDynLib thepacakgename
#' @importFrom Rcpp sourceCpp
NULL
~~~    

Note that these tags are added to R code, not the C++ code.

In the `C++ code`, add following:  

~~~
#include <Rcpp.h>
using namespace Rcpp;

// [[Rcpp::export]]
Some C++ code


/*** R
some R code for testing purpose
*/
~~~


## Reference
1. [Rcpp book](http://www.rcpp.org/book/)  
2. [Advanced R](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Rcpp.html)  
3. [R packages](http://r-pkgs.had.co.nz/)

